From the New York Times, I'm Michael
Bubaro. This is the daily.
[Music]
Over the past few weeks, the most senior
intelligence officials in the federal
government have released a series of new
documents that they claim shows that
President Obama and his deputies carried
out a criminal conspiracy against
President Trump starting in 2016.
Today, Mike Schmidt on what's behind the
sudden reemergence of the Trump Russia
saga and what happens when the heads of
the CIA, FBI, and DOJ all turn their
attention to the president's domestic
enemies.
[Music]
It's Wednesday, August 13th.
Mike, I think for a lot of us, this all
started a couple of weeks ago inside the
White House press briefing room.
>> Hello. Good afternoon, everybody.
>> And I wonder if you can take us back to
that moment.
>> Let me begin with a few scheduling
items.
>> It starts with the White House press
secretary holding her regular daily
press briefing. We have a special guest
with us today who will speak
momentarily.
>> But for this briefing, she brings out a
special guest.
>> Thank you very much. Good afternoon. At
President Trump's direction and with
>> she hands over the podium, the biggest
bully pulpit that the White House has to
Tulsi Gabbard, the director of national
intelligence. The stunning revelations
that we are releasing today should be of
concern to every American. This is not
about
>> who oversees all of the intelligence
community agencies.
>> The implications of this are farreaching
and have to do with the integrity of our
democratic republic. and she proceeds to
claim that she has uncovered a massive
conspiracy involving President Obama,
his intelligence agencies, Russia, and
Trump.
>> There is irrefutable evidence that
detail how President Obama and his
national security team directed the
creation of an intelligence community
assessment that they knew was false. She
goes so far to say
>> the expressed intent and what followed
afterward can only be described as a
year'sl long coup and a treasonous
conspiracy.
>> That what Obama
>> and his intelligence agencies did was
treason.
>> Director Gabbard, we thank you for your
time today.
>> This is a truly extraordinary claim from
the senior most intelligence official in
the United States. And Mike, we'll
eventually talk through the specific
allegations that Gabbard is making.
We'll fact check it, but just explain at
the highest possible level what's really
going on here, what it is that Gabbard
is doing. Gabbard's press conference was
the start of this week's long effort by
several different members of the Trump
administration to do two things.
The first is to make the case that they
now have new evidence to support their
longstanding claim that the Trump Russia
investigation was a conspiracy
manufactured by President Obama and his
intelligence officials to try to
essentially destroy Trump and undermine
his legitimacy
as a president. Mhm. The second thing
they're trying to do is apparently
create a distraction because Trump finds
himself in this highly unusual situation
in the past several weeks in which he is
almost crosswise with his base over the
Jeffrey Epstein scandal. And the Trump
administration is going back to an old
play of using Russia and the idea that
Trump is a victim of a larger conspiracy
there to distract
from all of the Epstein questions that
they don't seem to have any good answers
for. Right. Talking about Russia better
than talking about Epstein. Correct. And
in a larger sense, what the
administration is trying to do is to not
just say, "Hey, these guys were
criminals," but to bring criminal
charges against them for engaging in
this conspiracy,
which would be a major escalation in a
very longunning set of complaints about
the Russia investigation. They want to
follow this thing all the way through
and put Barack Obama and officials like
his CIA director John Brennan in prison.
Mike, since for the Trump
administration, this is all about the
original government investigation into
Trump and Russia dating back to the 2016
campaign, I think we need to go back to
that investigation, which I know you
covered very closely.
just remind us of the very basics of
that investigation and its conclusions
and why the Trump administration
remained so fixated on it. In the
aftermath of Trump winning the 2016
election, it was widely understood that
Russia had meddled in the campaign.
Obama faced with that reality ordered
his intelligence community to conduct an
assessment essentially a determination
to understand
what Russia had done and why it had done
it. The intelligence community comes to
a series of conclusions
which they lay out in a document that
was released in the final days of the
Obama administration just before Trump
was about to take over. And they find
that Putin tried to hurt Hillary Clinton
and help Donald Trump while undermining
America's democracy.
But for Trump,
this document, this assessment was the
original sin because what it did was
cast doubt on his victory. Did he win
the election fair and square or did the
Russians help him do that? And from what
you're saying, folks like Tulsi Gabbard
are now coming out in the last two weeks
and saying we have firm evidence that
that intelligence community assessment
was wrong and that the people involved
in producing it, especially Obama, knew
that it was wrong. So, let's get back to
what Gabbard is alleging. What Gabard is
starting to do is declassify documents
that she claims irrefutably prove that
not only is the assessment a bunch of
nonsense, but it's at the heart of a
criminal conspiracy.
>> Mhm. So, she releases a classified
report that was written by House
Republicans in Trump's first term that
claims that Putin was not trying to help
Trump and hurt Hillary Clinton. So, a
report that takes real issue with this
pretty central finding of the Obama
intelligence conclusion that Putin wants
Trump to win. Correct. But it's really
important to note that this report was
written by a bunch of hardened Trump
partisans in the House and it stands
alone.
No other serious entity that has looked
at this question,
including a massive bipartisan
investigation in the Senate, comes to
the claim that these House Republicans
did.
>> Mhm. How does a report like that justify
the incredibly strong language that
Gabbard is using that there is
treasonous conspiracy of foot in the
Obama administration against Trump?
Well, it doesn't. There is a massive gap
between what she is claiming and what
she is releasing.
>> Mhm. The report offers essentially a
different opinion from what the Obama
administration came to. Essentially
says, you guys said Putin wanted to do
one thing. We believe Putin didn't want
to do that. But there's nothing in that
report like an email from Obama to his
intelligence community saying, "I don't
care what the evidence shows. We need to
get Donald Trump
that proves or shows or raises even
questions about a larger treasonous
conspiracy." Right? There's no evidence,
it sounds like, of any kind, to suggest
a conspiracy. But that is not at all how
Tulsi Gabbard is talking about this from
the White House podium. No, she is
making this out like the smoking gun
that Trump and his allies have been
searching for for all these years.
Nothing that she has released backs up
her claim of a treasonous conspiracy.
But despite that, she sends a criminal
referral to the Justice Department.
essentially a letter saying, "Hey guys,
you really need to conduct a criminal
investigation into this."
And Gabbert is not the only Trump
administration official who over the
past few weeks has been declassifying
information and releasing documents to
claim that they have their own evidence
that Obama and his officials engaged in
criminality. And we will talk about
those right after the break.
[Music]
We'll be right back.
So, Mike, walk us through what these
other Trump administration intelligence
officials have been releasing in their
effort like Gabbard to try to prove that
the Obama Russia assessment was a
criminal conspiracy.
The head of the CIA, John Ratcliffe,
puts out a report that also cast doubt
on the 2016 intelligence assessment. How
so? The report doesn't dispute
the central finding of the 2016
assessment, but it takes issue with the
trade craft for how the report was
produced. It says that the process was
rushed. It says that top officials were
far too involved in it and it says that
there was pressure on analysts to reach
a conclusion. Mhm. But then the report
kind of undercuts itself because it says
that there's no evidence that the
analysts actually felt that pressure.
>> H so a pretty complicated and
contradictory set of claims there.
>> Correct. And there's even another, I
hate to say it, confusing claim.
>> Mhm.
>> And that's about a footnote and an annex
onto the original assessment. Just hold
my hand. Let me try and explain this to
you.
>> Okay?
>> As part of the assessment, the CIA had
the dossier. Remember that compilation
of unsubstantiated allegations dug up by
a British spy about Trump's ties to
Russia
attached as an annex to the assessment.
The assessment was not based on the
dossier. It didn't play a role in the
conclusions.
But what the report is essentially
saying is that this unsubstantiated
document called the dossier, it should
never have been attached in the first
place. And because it was attached, it
cast some doubt on the entire claim.
>> Mhm.
>> So based on this and not much more,
Radcliffe comes out swinging.
>> Trey, there is no question this was the
greatest uh political scandal of our
lifetime. He says, "All the world can
now see the truth.
>> It derailed our country. It derailed
President Trump's uh presidency, his
first uh four years in
>> Brennan, Clapper, and Comey manipulated
intelligence and silenced career
professionals."
>> And it really is a stain on our country
that should never happen again. And and
Donald Trump is committed to making sure
that it doesn't. all to get Trump
despite the fact that there's nothing in
his own agency's assessment of the
assessment that proves that correct. So,
as with the case of Tulsi Gabber, the
director of national intelligence,
when it comes to the CIA director, John
Ratcliffe, we're dealing with a very big
gap between the evidence that he's
putting forward and the claims he's
making very loudly and very publicly.
He's claiming like Gabbard, there's a
criminal conspiracy here, but this CIA
report he puts out in no way supports
that. But Radcliffe too sends his own
criminal referrals to the Justice
Department asking them to investigate.
So we now have two intelligence
officials telling the Department of
Justice that they should criminally
investigate Obama administration
officials over the Russia investigation.
>> And while all this is going on, the FBI
chimes in. Uh this was incredible.
Sources telling Fox News digital that
director Cash Patel found a tranch of
documents related to the Trump Russia
probe inside multiple burn bags. These
burn
>> the FBI director Cash Patel declassifies
a piece of intelligence that he claims
shows that this conspiracy
it actually originated with Hillary
Clinton.
>> That's how vindictive and vicious the
former leadership structure here was.
They withheld and hid documentation and
put it in rooms where people weren't
supposed to look. And it's a good thing
we're here now to clean it up and you're
about to see a wave of transparency.
>> But are you saying
>> and what evidence does Patel offer to
support that claim?
>> An email between Clinton allies in which
they claim that Clinton personally
approved a plan to tie Trump to Russia.
But what Patel doesn't say is that a
previous special counsel that was
appointed by Trump's Justice Department
to look into the Russia hoax determined
that the email was likely a fake. Wow.
That Russian intelligence officials had
taken a range of hacked emails and made
them into a composite that depicted
Clinton as the originator of the
conspiracy. And presumably the FBI
director Cash Patel would have known
that and yet still released it and
treated it as a smoking gun. Correct.
So a very noticeable pattern is clearly
emerging here. A senior Trump
administration intelligence official
claims very publicly to have unveiled a
new piece of evidence proving a criminal
conspiracy when it comes to the Russia
investigation. And yet when we actually
look at the allegedly supporting
evidence, the document, the report, the
email, it doesn't hold up. It does not
support the claim that the official is
making. Yet, nevertheless, it's
amounting to a series of pretty serious
criminal referrals to the Justice
Department.
>> And what it does is it teases up the
Justice Department and Attorney General
Pam Bondi to go out and do a criminal
investigation. So, within days of these
criminal referrals coming in,
>> breaking tonight, a major development in
the Russia gate investigation. reports
start to emerge in conservative media.
>> The Justice Department is taking its
case to a grand jury
>> that there is a grand jury investigation
being conducted into these allegations.
>> Attorney General Bondi is taking the
referrals from Director of National
Intelligence Tulsi Gabbard, quote, very
seriously.
>> Here's what President Trump said on True
Social. The truth always wins out. This
is great news. God bless America. and a
white house.
>> And just put that into context for us.
The significance of a grand jury
possibly looking into this. It means
that the Justice Department is prepared
to go out and use its criminal powers,
the power of subpoena, the power to
compel witnesses to testify, the ability
to go to a judge and try and get a
search warrant. It means that the
Justice Department is now willing to use
the federal government's most powerful
tools to try to get to the bottom of
this. I mean, let's end with a reality
check about whether or not these
criminal investigations could ever
result in successful prosecutions and
convictions of senior Obama
administration officials. Because let's
just take the example of former
President Obama. It's our understanding
now, it's been widely covered, that the
Supreme Court's ruling that gives
President Trump immunity
for a lot of things that he has done in
office would likely apply to previous
presidents, including Obama. So, it
seems like it'd be pretty hard to
successfully prosecute President Obama
for something he did in office. Right.
Correct. And prosecuting the other
intelligence officials would be very
difficult too. You would need to have a
judge look at the evidence that the
government is presenting and essentially
say, "Yeah, there's enough here to move
forward with putting this person on
trial and trying to get a conviction."
>> Right? And as we've demonstrated, there
isn't all that much evidence there. the
chances that they would be prosecuted
are not nearly as high as the
expectations.
>> But I think we kind of need to take a
step back from that and look at the
larger issue of what's going on with
retribution
during Trump's second term. Right after
Trump came into the White House, he and
his aids went after law firms and
universities.
And particularly with the universities
like Harvard, they used a whole of
government approach to pressure the
school in ways that certainly I had
never considered. Right. When you say
whole of government, you simply mean
almost the entirety of the government,
multiple agencies. We use this term like
whole of government approach, a term
that's usually used about how to use the
federal government to solve a problem
like cancer. Mhm.
>> And what we're now seeing is that whole
of government approach where the
intelligence community is using
the fruits of what it has in its coffers
to get the Justice Department to go out
and criminally investigate Trump's
enemies.
And there's a level of sophistication to
that that is just different than what we
saw in Trump's first term when he had
many more guard rails around him. And
his best efforts at getting his enemies
investigated were screaming about it on
Twitter or trying behind closed doors to
twist the arms of Justice Department
officials.
Right. This time he is activating the
leaders of the most important agencies
in the federal government who seem
extremely eager to cooperate with this
goal of his of going after these people.
I mean the director of national
intelligence, the director of the CIA,
the director of the FBI. And I don't
even think Trump needs to say anything.
These people all have the same view of
Trump's enemies and what should be done
to them. So I'm not sure it's as much
about whether Trump directed it or not,
but that he has surrounded himself with
yes people who know exactly what he
wants
and are using their powers to try to get
him there.
>> Mhm. But is there any risk to the Trump
administration doing everything that's
done here, starting these criminal
investigations and as you've said,
potentially not getting very far, not
being able to really prosecute anyone,
probably not being able to get anyone in
jail. Doesn't that end up potentially
backfiring in kind of the same way that
overpromising on the Jeffrey Epstein
story has backfired? I think the Epstein
story is different because
in the Epstein story,
Trump and his allies who are now in his
administration
promised that they would release
information that was going to show
Trump's base how
powerful, wealthy Democrats were
pedophiles. And now in reaction to the
administration not releasing that
material, it's raised questions among
the base about, hey, are you trying to
still cover something up?
>> In the Russia story, it's always been
very clear to the base who the good guys
and the bad guys are to them,
>> right?
>> And it's been clear that Trump has tried
as hard as he can to go after them. And
at the end of the day, I'm not sure that
Trump's supporters are going to hold him
accountable if promises of criminal
prosecutions
don't turn out the way that they want,
right? Cuz he will always be on the
right side of this battle. When it comes
to Russia, Trump will always be the
victim and he will always be the hero.
Well, Mike, thank you very much. Thanks
for having me.
>> In response to the drum beatat of new
documents and criminal referrals from
the Trump White House, a spokesperson
for President Obama recently issued a
statement. It said, quote, "Out of
respect for the office of the
presidency, our office does not normally
dignify the constant nonsense and
misinformation flowing out of this White
House with a response. But these claims
are outrageous enough to merit one.
These bizarre allegations are ridiculous
and a weak attempt at distraction."
We'll be right back.
[Music]
Here's what else you need to know today.
On Tuesday, the mayor and police chief
of Washington DC met with the Trump
administration to discuss the
president's takeover of the city's
police force and the imminent arrival of
federal troops on the city's streets to
fight crime.
>> We're here to work together with our
federal partners, and that's what we're
going to do.
>> City officials appeared to take a
consiliatory approach to what is widely
seen as an unusual encroachment on their
authority. During a news conference, the
police chief and the mayor emphasized
their desire to make the most of the
federal support.
>> How we got here or what the what we
think about the the circumstances right
now, we we have more police and we want
to make sure we're using them.
>> Are you concerned? And Russian troops
are making swift battlefield advances
inside eastern Ukraine just days before
their leader Vladimir Putin is scheduled
to hold highstakes peace talks with
President Trump. The Russian troops have
advanced several miles into Ukrainian
held territory, potentially giving Putin
a stronger hand in his negotiations with
Trump.
Russia now occupies about 20% of Ukraine
and has repeatedly said that it wants to
win permanent control of Eastern Ukraine
in any peace deal.
Today's episode was produced by Anna
Foley and Nina Feldman. It was edited by
Rachel Quester, contains original music
by Diane Wong, Marian Lozano, and Dan
Powell, and was engineered by Alyssa
Moxley. Our theme music is by Jim
Brunberg and Ben Lansberg of Wonderly.
Special thanks to Devon Baron.
[Music]
That's it for the daily. I'm Michael
Bora. See you tomorrow.
[Music]